Content for speculative loading (#29183)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/performance/speculative_loading/index.md

This page reviews available speculative loading technologies and when they can and should be used to improve performance.

## Speculative loading mechanisms

There are several mechanisms for speculative loading:

- **Prefetching** involves fetching some or all of the resources required to render a document (or part of a document) before they are needed, so that when the time comes to render it, rendering can be achieved much more quickly.
- **Prerendering** goes a step further, and actually renders the content ready to be shown when required. Depending on how this is done, this can result in an instant navigation from old page to new page.
- **Preconnecting** involves speeding up future loads from a given origin by preemptively performing part or all of the connection handshake (i.e. DNS + TCP + TLS).

> **Note:** The above descriptions are high-level and general. Exactly what browsers will do to achieve prefetching and prerendering depends on the features used. More exact feature descriptions are provided in the [Speculative loading features](#speculative_loading_features) section below.

## How is speculative loading achieved?

Speculative loading is achieved in two main ways.

> First, some browsers will automatically prerender pages based on various heuristics to provide automatic performance improvements. Exactly how this is done depends on the browser implementation. Chrome, for example, automatically prerenders pages when matching strings are typed into the address bar if it has a high confidence that you will visit that page (see [Viewing Chrome's address bar predictions](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/prerender-pages/#viewing-chromes-address-bar-predictions) for more details). In addition, it may automatically prerender search results pages when search terms are typed into the address bar, when instructed to do so by the search engine. It does this using the same mechanism as the [Speculation Rules API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Speculation_Rules_API).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, some browsers will automatically prerender pages based on various heuristics to provide automatic performance improvements. Exactly how this is done depends on the browser implementation. Chrome, for example, automatically prerenders pages when matching strings are typed into the address bar — if it has a high confidence that you will visit that page (see [Viewing Chrome's address bar predictions](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/prerender-pages/#viewing-chromes-address-bar-predictions) for more details). In addition, it may automatically prerender search results pages when search terms are typed into the address bar, when instructed to do so by the search engine. It does this using the same mechanism as the [Speculation Rules API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Speculation_Rules_API).
```

Author: Updated

For example:

```html
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://example.com" />
```

`<link rel="preconnect">` is widely supported across browsers, and will provide a benefit to any future cross-origin HTTP request, navigation or subresource. It has no benefit on same-origin requests because the connection is already open.

If a page needs to make connections to many third-party domains, preconnecting them all can be counterproductive. The `<link rel="preconnect">` hint is best used for only the most critical connections. For the others, just use `<link rel="dns-prefetch">` to save time on the first step — the DNS lookup.

You can also implement preconnect as an HTTP [Link](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Link) header, for example:

```http
Link: <https://example.com>; rel="preconnect"
```

### `<link rel="dns-prefetch">`

> [`<link rel="dns-prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/dns-prefetch) provides a hint to browsers that the user is likely to need resources from the specified resource's origin, and therefore the browser can likely improve performance by preemptively performing DNS resolution for that origin. It is identical to `<link rel="preconnect">` except that it only handles the DNS part.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`<link rel="dns-prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/dns-prefetch) provides a hint to browsers that the user is likely to need resources from the specified resource's origin, and therefore the browser may be able to improve performance by preemptively performing DNS resolution for that origin. It is identical to `<link rel="preconnect">` except that it only handles the DNS part.
```

Author: Updated

Again, browser support is widespread, and it has no benefit on same-origin requests because the connection is already open.

For example:

```html
<link rel="dns-prefetch" href="https://example.com" />
```

> **Note:** See [Using dns-prefetch](/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/dns-prefetch) for more details.

### `<link rel="preload">`

> [`<link rel="preload">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/preload) provides a hint to browsers as to what resources are high-priority on _the current page_, so it can start downloading them early when it sees the {{htmlelement("link")}} element(s) in the {{htmlelement("head")}} of the page.

Reviewer: Good to push some of this into the actual preload page.

Author: There is quite a lot of detail already on the preload page. I'm pretty sure this stuff is all said already, in difference works. Anything in particular you were thinking of?

Reviewer: No. If you're happy, I am too.

For example:

```html
<link rel="preload" href="main.js" as="script" />
<!-- CORS-enabled preload -->
<link
  rel="preload"
  href="https://www.example.com/fonts/cicle_fina-webfont.woff2"
  as="font"
  type="font/woff2"
  crossorigin />
```

> The result is kept in a per-document in-memory cache. If you preload something your current page doesn't navigate to, it is generally a waste of resources, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result is kept in a per-document in-memory cache. If you preload something your current page doesn't use as a sub-resource, it is generally a waste of resources, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow.
```

Author: Updated

> The result is kept in a per-document in-memory cache. If you preload something your current page doesn't navigate to, it is generally a waste of resources, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow.

Reviewer 2: I'm actually unsure if `<link rel="preload">` will populate the HTTP cache? @yoavweiss @noamr maybe you know?

Author: This was possibly guesswork on my part; I can't remember where I might have explicitly read it.

You can also implement preload as an HTTP [Link](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Link) header, for example:

```http
Link: <https://www.example.com/fonts/cicle_fina-webfont.woff2>; rel="preload"
```

Browser support for `<link rel="preload">`/`<link rel="modulepreload">` is widespread in modern browsers.

### `<link rel="modulepreload">`

[`<link rel="modulepreload">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/modulepreload) provides a hint to browsers as to what JavaScript modules are high-priority on _the current page_, so it can start downloading them early.

For example:

```js
<link rel="modulepreload" href="main.js" />
```

It is a specialized version of `<link rel="preload">` for [JavaScript modules](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules) and works basically the same way. However, there are some differences:

- The browser knows the resource is a JavaScript module, as the `as` attribute is not needed, and it can use the correct credentials modes to avoid double-fetching.
- Rather than just downloading it and storing it in a cache, the browser downloads it, then parses and compiles it directly into the in-memory module map.

> - The browser also does this same for module dependencies automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The browser can also do the same for module dependencies, automatically.
```

Author: Updated; thanks!

### `<link rel="prefetch">`

[`<link rel="prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prefetch) provides a hint to browsers that the user is likely to need the target resource for future navigations, and therefore the browser can likely improve the user experience by preemptively fetching and caching the resource. `<link rel="prefetch">` is used for same-site navigation resources, or for subresources used by same-site pages.

For example:

```js
<link rel="prefetch" href="main.js" />
```

Prefetching can be used to fetch both HTML and sub-resources for a possible next navigation. A common use case is to have a simple website landing page that fetches more "heavy-weight" resources used by the rest of the site.

```html
<link rel="prefetch" href="/app/style.css" />

> <link rel="prefetch" href="https://example.com/landing-page" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<link rel="prefetch" href="/landing-page" />
```

Author: Updated

Many browsers now implement some form of [cache partitioning](https://developer.chrome.com/en/blog/http-cache-partitioning/), which makes `<link rel="prefetch">` useless for resources intended for use by different top-level sites. This includes the main document when navigating cross-site. So, for example, the following prefetch:

```html
<link rel="prefetch" href="https://news.example/article" />
```

Would not be accessible from `https://aggregator.example/`.

> **Note:** `<link rel="prefetch">` is functionally equivalent to a {{domxref("fetch()")}} call with a `priority: "low"` option set on it, except that the former will generally have an even lower priority, and it will have a [`Sec-Purpose: prefetch`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Sec-Purpose) header set on the request.

> **Note:** The fetch request for a `prefetch` operation results in an HTTP Request that includes the HTTP header [`Sec-Purpose: prefetch`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Sec-Purpose). A server might use this header to change the cache timeouts for the resources, or perform other special handling.

> > The request should also include the {{HTTPHeader("Sec-Fetch-Dest")}} header with the value set to `empty`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The request will also include the {{HTTPHeader("Sec-Fetch-Dest")}} header with the value set to `empty`.
```

Author: Updated

> > The {{HTTPHeader("Accept")}} header in the request should match the value used for normal navigation requests. This allows the browser to find the matching cached resources following navigation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The {{HTTPHeader("Accept")}} header in the request will match the value used for normal navigation requests. This allows the browser to find the matching cached resources following navigation.
```

Author: updated

> If a response is returned, it gets cached with the request in the HTTP cache.

### `<link rel="prerender">` {{deprecated_inline}}{{non-standard_inline}}

> **Note:** This technology was only ever available in Chrome, and is now deprecated. You should use the [Speculation Rules API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Speculation_Rules_API) instead, which supercedes this.

[`<link rel="prerender">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prerender) provides a hint to browsers that the user might need the target resource for the next navigation, and therefore the browser can likely improve performance by prerendering the resource. `prerender` is used for future navigations, same-site only, and as such makes sense for multi-page applications (MPAs), not single-page applications (SPAs).

For example:

```html
<link rel="prerender" href="/next-page" />
```

> It will fetch the referenced document, then fetch any linked resources that are statically findable and fetch them too, storing the result in the HTTP cache on disk with a five-minute timeout. The exception is subresources loaded via JavaScript — it does not find these. It has other problems too — like `<link rel="prefetch">` it can also be blocked by [Cache-Control](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control) settings. and be rendered useless for resources intended for use by different top-level sites by browser [cache partitioning](https://developer.chrome.com/en/blog/http-cache-partitioning/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will fetch the referenced document, then fetch any linked resources that are statically findable and fetch them too, storing the result in the HTTP cache on disk with a five-minute timeout. The exception is subresources loaded via JavaScript — it does not find these. It has other problems too — like `<link rel="prefetch">` it can also be blocked by [Cache-Control](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control) settings, and be rendered useless for resources intended for use by different top-level sites by browser [cache partitioning](https://developer.chrome.com/en/blog/http-cache-partitioning/).
```

Author: Updated
